Title: Fashion invitation objects

----

Date: 2016-02-28

----

Text: 

(image: dries-van-noten.jpg class: left)

A human hand holds up a clear jewelry box with plant-like material inside. Instead of examining the plant material, the human reads the text printed on the outside of the box. The green plant isn't the point: it is simply a backdrop that improves the white text's legibility. The text says there will be a fashion show for designer Dries van Noten in Paris on 3pm on a Wednesday in the fall.

(clearer: )

After seeing this image in my Instagram feed, I google “fashion event invitation object” to see if there are other invitations working in this way, that is, invitations disguised as objects with their own functionality. Below is a sampling of my findings. (The complete collection is viewable on my (link: https://www.are.na/laurel-schwulst/fashion-event-invitation-objects text: are.na channel).)

(image: martin-margiela-01.jpg caption: 1 class: left medium)
(image: martin-margiela-02.jpg caption: 2 class: left medium)
(image: martin-margiela-07.png caption: 3 class: left medium)
(image: slow-and-steady.png caption: 4 class: left medium)
(image: betsey-johnson.jpg caption: 5 class: left medium)
(image: eckhaus-latta-03.jpg caption: 6 class: left medium)
(image: kenzo.jpg caption: 7 class: left medium)
(image: yohji-yamamoto-02.png caption: 8 class: left medium clearer)

(smalltext: open)

1. A keychain light by Maison Martin Margiela.

2. Same keychain light, on.

3. A clear poncho by Maison Martin Margiela.

4. A deflated balloon by Slow and Steady Wins the Race.

5. A pill box by Betsey Johnson.

6. A one gallon ziploc bag by Eckhaus Latta. (According to designer Eric Wrenn, bags were sent sealed with a shorn tuft of hair from Zoe Latta’s dog Goose.)

7. Bag of wet fall leaves by Kenzo.

8. Sampling of yarn by Yohji Yamamoto.

(smalltext: close)

 ------

I like that these objects are initially shocking and surprising. If designed a particular way, they could have a life beyond the duration of the invitation or event itself.